Excerpt from "The Chants of Maldoror" by Comte de Lautreamont

Not long ago I saw the sea once again and trod upon the bridges of 
ships; my memories of it are as lively as if it had all happened 
yesterday. If you are able, however, be as calm as I am as you read what 
is to follow (for already I regret offering it to you) and do not blush 
for the human heart.

O octopus of the silky glance! You whose soul is inseparable from mine; 
you, the most beautiful creature upon the terrestrial globe; you, 
chieftain of a seraglio of four hundred sucking-cups; you, in whom are 
nobly enthroned as though in their natural habitat, by a common 
agreement and with an indestructible bond, the divine graces and the 
sweet virtue of communication: why are you not with me, your belly of 
quicksilver pressed to my breast of aluminum, the two of us sitting here 
together upon a rock by the shore as we contemplate the spectacle I 
adore!

Ancient ocean, crystal-waved, you resemble somewhat those bluish marks 
that one sees upon the battered backs of cabin-boys; you are a vast 
bruise inflicted upon the body of earth: I love this comparison. At the 
first sight of you a long breath of sadness that might be the murmur of 
your own bland zephyr passes over the deeply moved soul, leaving 
ineffaceable scars, and you recall to the memories of those who love 
you, though they are not always aware of it, the crude origins of man 
when first he made the acquaintance of the sorrow that has never 
deserted him. I salute you, ancient ocean!

Ancient ocean, your harmonious sphere, rejoicing the grave countenance 
of geometry, reminds me too much of man's little eyes, in paltriness 
resembling those of the boar and those of the nightbird in the circular 
perfection of their contour. Yet man has thought himself beautiful 
throughout the centuries. As for me, I presume that he believes in his 
beauty only from pride, but that he is not really beautiful and that he 
suspects this, for why does he contemplate the countenance of his 
fellow-man with so much scorn? I salute you, ancient ocean!

Ancient ocean, you are the symbol of identity: always equal to yourself. 
Essentially you never change, and if your waves are somewhere lashed 
into fury, elsewhere they are stilled in the most complete peace. You 
are not like men, who linger in the street to watch two bulldogs tearing 
at each other's throats but who hurry on when a funeral passes; who in 
the morning may be reasonable and in the evening evil-tempered; who 
laugh today and weep tomorrow. I salute you, ancient ocean!

Ancient ocean, it might not be impossible that you conceal within your 
bosom future utilities for man. You have already given him the whale. 
You do not willingly yield up the thousand secrets of your intimate 
organism to the hungry eyes of the natural sciences: you are modest. Man 
praises himself constantly, and for what trifles! I salute you, ancient 
ocean!

Ancient ocean, the different species of fish that you nourish have not 
sworn brotherhood among themselves. Each species lives in its own place. 
The varying temperaments and conformations of each one explain 
satisfactorily what appears at first to be an anomaly. So it is with 
Man, who has not the same motives to excuse him. If a piece of land is 
inhabited by thirty million humans, these believe that they are forced 
to stand aloof from the existence of their neighbors who are rooted in 
an adjacent piece of land. To descend from the general to the 
particular, each man lives like a savage in his lair, rarely coming 
forth to visit his fellows similarly crouching in another den. The great 
universal family of human beings is a Utopia worthy of the meanest 
logic. Furthermore, from the spectacle of your fruitful breasts the idea 
of ingratitude is suggested, for we think of those innumerable parents 
ungrateful enough to the Creator to abandon the fruit of their wretched 
unions. I salute you, ancient ocean!

Ancient ocean, your material vastness may be compared only with the 
active natural force that was necessary to beget your total mass. A 
glance is not sufficient to encompass you. To envision your entirety the 
sight must revolve its telescope in a continuous movement towards the 
four points of the horizon, just as a mathematician when he resolves an 
equation must examine various possible solutions before attacking the 
problem. Man devours nutritive substances and, in order to appear fat, 
makes other efforts worthy of a better cause. Let the beloved bullfrog 
inflate itself to its heart's desire. Be calm: it will never equal you 
in size. At least I suppose not. I salute you, ancient ocean.

Ancient ocean, your waters are bitter. They have exactly the same flavor 
as the gall distilled by critics upon the fine arts, the sciences, upon 
all. If there should be a man of genius they make him out an idiot. If 
someone should have a beautiful body he is called a hideous hunchback. 
Indeed, it must be that man feels his imperfections strongly (three 
quarters of which, incidentally, are his own fault) to criticize himself 
thus! I salute you, ancient ocean!

Ancient ocean, men, despite the excellence of their methods and assisted 
by scientific means of investigation, have not yet succeeded in plumbing 
the dizzy depths of your abyss. You have profundities that the longest 
and heaviest soundings have recognized inaccessible. To do so is granted 
to fish, but not to humankind. I have often asked myself which is the 
easier to recognize: the depth of the ocean or the depth of the human 
heart! Often as I stand watching the ships, my hand to my brow while the 
moon swings askew between the masts, I have surprised myself, blind to 
everything but the goal I was pursuing, trying to solve this difficult 
problem! Yes, which is the deeper, the more impenetrable of the two: the 
ocean or the human heart? If thirty years experience of life can to a 
certain degree swing the balance in favor of one or the other of these 
solutions, I should be allowed to assert that, despite the depth of the 
ocean it cannot touch, in a comparison on these grounds, the depth of 
the human heart. I have known men who were virtuous. They died at sixty 
and the world never failed to exclaim: "They did good on this earth. 
That is to say, they practised charity, that is all. They were not 
wicked. Anyone could do as much." Who may understand why two lovers who 
idolized one another the night before will quarrel over a single 
misunderstood word and flee on the wings of hatred to opposite points of 
the compass, full of love and remorse yet refusing to see one another, 
each cloaked in lonely pride? This is a miracle that occurs daily and is 
none the less miraculous for that. Who may comprehend why we delight not 
only in the general misfortunes of mankind but also those of our dearest 
friends, while at the same time we suffer for them? Here is an 
irrefutable example to terminate the series: man says hypocritically, 
yes; and thinks, no. Thus it is that the wild boars of humanity have so 
much confidence in one another and are not selfcentered Psychology has a 
long way to go. I salute you, ancient ocean!

Ancient ocean, you are so powerful that men have learned this at their 
own expense. In vain they have employed all the resources of their 
genius... they cannot enslave you. They have found their master. I say 
that they have found something stronger than they. This something has a 
name. This name is: the ocean! Such is the fear that you inspire in them 
that they respect you. In spite of that you toss their heaviest machines 
around with grace, elegance, and ease. You make them leap acrobatically 
into the heavens, and you make them plunge into the very depths of your 
domains: a professional tumbler would be jealous of you. Happy are they 
whom you do not envelop utterly in your boiling coils, swallowing them 
into your watery guts without benefit of railroads to find out how the 
fishes are doing, and more important still how they themselves are 
doing. Man says: "I am more intelligent than the ocean." This is 
possible, even more or less true. But the ocean inspires more dread in 
him than he in the ocean. No proof of this is necessary. That 
patriarchal observer, contemporary of the first epoch of our suspended 
globe, smiles pityingly when he contemplates the naval battles of 
nations. Here are a hundred leviathans issued from the hands of 
humanity. The sharp commands of the officers, the shrieks of the 
wounded, the blasts of cannon, all this is a hullabaloo purposely 
created to kill a few seconds of time. It appears that the drama is 
over, that the ocean has engulfed everything into its belly. Its mouth 
is enormous. The ocean must be vast towards the bottom, in the direction 
of the unknown! Finally to crown the stupid farce, which is not even 
interesting, some travel-weary stork appears in the air and without 
interrupting its flight cries out: "This displeases me! There were some 
black dots down there. I closed my eyes and they disappeared!" I salute 
you, ancient ocean!

Ancient ocean, O greatest of celibates, as you wander amid the solemn 
solitudes of your quiet kingdoms you are justly proud of your native 
magnificence and of the justifiable eulogies I am eager to offer you. 
Voluptuously cradled by the gentle flow of your majestic deliberation, 
which is among the greatest of the attributes bestowed upon you by the 
sovereign power, gloomily, mysteriously you unfold over your sublime 
surface your incomparable waves with the quiet sense of your eternal 
strength. They follow one another in parallel lines, each separated from 
the next by a brief distance. Scarcely has one subsided than another 
swells to replace it, to the accompaniment of the melancholy sound of 
breaking foam, warning us that all is foam. (So do human beings, those 
living waves, die monotonously one after another; but they leave no 
foamy music). Birds of passage rest upon the waves confidently and 
abandon themselves to their motion, full of graceful pride, until the 
bones of their wings have recovered their customary strength and they 
continue their aerial pilgrimage. I would that human majesty were but 
the reflection of your own. I ask much, and this sincere wish is a glory 
for you. Your moral greatness, image of the infinite, is vast as the 
meditations of a philosopher, as the love of a woman, as the heavenly 
beauty of a bird, as the thoughts of a poet. You are more beautiful than 
the night.

Tell me, ocean, will you be my brother? Roll wildly... more wildly 
yet... if you would have me compare you to the vengeance of God.

Spread out your livid claws and tear yourself out a pathway in your own 
bosom... that is good.

Roll your appalling breakers, hideous ocean, understood by me alone, and 
before whose feet I fall prostrate.

Man's majesty is borrowed; it shall not overcome me. You, yes.

Oh, when you advance, your crest high and terrible, surrounded by your 
tortuous coils as by a royal court, magnetic and wild, rolling your 
waves one upon the other full of the consciousness of what you are; and 
when you give utterance from the depths of your bosom as if you were 
suffering the pangs of some intense remorse which I have been unable to 
discover, to that perpetual heavy roar so greatly feared by men even 
when, trembling on the shore, they contemplate you in safety: then I can 
perceive that I do not possess that signal right to name myself your 
equal.

Hence in the presence of your superiority I would bestow upon you all my 
love (and none may know how much love is contained in my aspirations 
towards beauty) if you would not make me reflect sadly upon my fellow 
men, who form the most ironical contrast to you, the most clownish 
antithesis that has ever been seen in creation.

I cannot love you, I detest you. Why do I return to you, for the 
thousandth time, to your friendly arms which part to caress my burning 
brow, their very contact extinguishing my fever! I know not your secret 
destiny. All that concerns you interests me. Tell me whether you are the 
dwelling-place of the Prince of Darkness. Tell me this, ocean... tell me 
(me alone, for fear of distressing those who have yet known nothing but 
illusion) whether the breath of Satan creates the tempests that fling 
your salty waters up to the clouds. You must tell me this because I 
should love to know that hell is so close to man.

I desire that this should be the last verse of my invocation. So, just 
once more, I would salute you and bid you farewell! Ancient ocean, 
crystal-waved... My eyes fill with copious tears and I have not the 
strength to proceed, for I feel that the moment is come to return among 
men with their brutal aspect. But, courage! Let us make a great effort, 
and accomplish dutifully our destiny on this earth. I salute you, 
ancient ocean!

